
# Vulnerability Classification
## Misconfigurations/Weak Configurations
Misconfiguration is the most common vulnerability and is mainly caused by human error

- Network Misconfiguration
	- Insecure protocols,open ports and services, errors, and weak encryption
- Host Misconfigurations
	- configuration flaws in the host server can be exploited to manipulate the resources and gain remote administrator access.
	- Ex: Open permissions and unsecured root accounts

## Application Flaws
Application flaws are vulnerabilities in applications that are exploited by attackers. Flawed applications pose security threats such as data tampering and unauthorized access to configuration stores.

- Bufer overflows, 
- Memory leaks,
- Resource exhaustion,
- integer overflows, 
- null pointer/object dereference,
- DLL injection, 
- Race conditions
	- Time of Check/Time of Use
- Improper input handling 
- Improper error handling

## Poor Patch Management
Software vendors provide patches that prevent exploitations and reduce the probability of threats exploiting a specific vulnerability. Unpatched software can make an application, server, or device vulnerable to various attacks.

- Unpatched Server
- Unpatched Firmware
- Unpatched OS
- Unpatched Applications

## Design Flaws
Vulnerabilities due to design flaws are universal to all operating devices and systems. Design vulnerabilities such as incorrect encryption or the poor validation of data refer to logical flaws in the functionality of the system that attackers exploit to bypass the detection mechanism and acquire access t o a secure system.
## Third-Party Risks
Third-party services or products can have access to privileged systems and applications, through which financial information, customer and employee data, and processes in the enterprise's supply chain can
be compromised. 
- Vendor management
	- System integration
	- Lack of vendor support
- Supply-chain risks
- Outsourced code development
- Data storage
- Cloud-based vs. on-premises risks

## Default Installations/ Default Configurations
Failing ot change the default setings while deploying software or hardware alows the atacker ot guess the settings to break into the system

## Operating System Flaws
Due to vulnerabilities in the operating systems, applications such as Trojans, worms, and viruses pose threats. Timely patching of the OS, installing minimal software applications, and using applications with firewall capabilities are essential steps that an administrator must take to protect the OS from attacks.

## Default Passwords
Manufacturers provide users with default passwords to access the device during its initial set- up, which users must change for future use. When users forget to update the passwords and continue using the default passwords, they make devices and systems vulnerable to various attacks, such as brute force and dictionary attacks.

## Zero-Day Vulnerabilities
Zero-day vulnerabilities are unknown vulnerabilities in software/hardware that are exposed but not yet patched. These Vulnerabilities are exploited by the attackers before being acknowledged and patched by the software developers or security analysts. Zero-day vulnerabilities are one of the major cyber-threats that continuously expose the vulnerable systems until they get patched.

## Legacy Platform Vulnerabilities
Legacy platform vulnerabilities are caused by obsolete or familiar codes. Legacy platforms are usually not supported when patching technical assets such as smartphones, computers, loT devices, OSes, applications, databases, firewalls, intrusion detection systems (IDSs), or other network components. Legacy systems can be secured using other security controls, rather than by fixing them. Another possible solution is to segregate these systems from the network so that attackers cannot gain physical access to them.

## System sprawl vulnerability
The system sprawl vulnerability arises within an organizational network because of an increased number of system or server connections without proper documentation or an understanding of their maintenance. These assets are often neglected over time, making them susceptible to attacks

## Improper Certificate and Key Management
Improper certificate and key management may lead to many vulnerabilities that alow attackers to perform password cracking and data exfiltration attacks. Storing or retaining legacy or outdated keys also poses major threats to organizations

# Types of Vulnerability Assessment

## Active Assessment
Uses a network scanner to find hosts, services, and vulnerabilities

Passive Assessment
Used to sniff the network traffic to discover present active systems, network services, applications, and vulnerabilities present

External Assessment
Aseses the network from ahacker's perspective ot discover exploits and vulnerabilities that are accessible ot the outside world.

Internal Asesment
Scans hte internal infrastructure ot discover exploits and vulnerabilities

Host-based Assessment
Conducts a configuration-level check ot identify
system configurations, user directories, file systems, registry setings, etc., to evaluate the possibility of compromise

Network-based Assessment
Network assessments determine the possible network security attacks that may occur on an organization's system. These assessments discover network resources and map the ports and services running to various areas on the network.

Application Assessment
Tests and analyzes all elements of the web infrastructure for any misconfiguration, outdated content, or known vulnerabilities

Database Assessment
A database assessment is any assessment focused on testing the databases for the presence of any misconfiguration or known
vulnerabilities

Wireless Network Assessment
Wireless network assessment determines the vulnerabilities in an organization's wireless networks.

Distributed Assessment
Assesses the distributed organization assets, such as client and server applications, simultaneously through
appropriate synchronization techniques

Credentialed Assessment
Assesses the network by obtaining the credentials of al machines present in the network

Non-Credentialed Assessment
Assesses the network without acquiring any credentials of the assets present in the enterprise network

Manual Assessment
In this type of assessment, the ethical hacker manually assesses the vulnerabilities, vulnerability ranking, vulnerability score, etc.

Automated Assessment
In this type of assessment, the ethical hacker employs various vulnerability assessment tools, such as Nessus, Qualys, GFI LanGuard, etc